Pituitary metastases are found in about 1% of all pituitary resections. They often derive from breast, lung, and gastroenteric tract adenocarcinomas, very rarely from thyroid carcinoma. Presenting symptoms of thyroid carcinoma metastatic to the pituitary gland are usually chiasmatic with central neurological impairment due to space-occupying expansion in the parasellar region. Hypopituitarism is more often associated with papillary and medullary rather than follicular thyroid carcinoma (FTC). Here we describe a patient with pituitary metastasis from FTC who had hypopituitarism with thyrotropin (TSH) deficiency.  A 61-year-old woman, who presented with visual deficits and pain to the right orbit, was found on magnetic resonance imaging to have a large mass involving the pituitary gland. She was found to have pituitary insufficiency based on corticotropin-releasing hormone and TSH-releasing hormone testing. Transnasopharyngeal biopsy of the mass revealed metastases from FTC. After total thyroidectomy, which confirmed widely invasive FTC, the patient underwent external beam radiation therapy of the metastases for progressive neurological symptoms and an increase in orbit pain. Since endogenous TSH production was insufficient, we used recombinant human TSH (rhTSH) as preparation for a series of radioiodine treatments. rhTSH administration, followed by 7.4 GBq of (131)I, was repeated seven times over a 10-year period. This was associated with a marked decrease in serum thyroglobulin levels accompanied by substantial clinical improvement, but after 7 years disease progression occurred.  Seven patients with pituitary metastases from FTC have been reported. In all cases, some neurological signs and symptoms related to mass effect were reported, but no pituitary insufficiency was described. This may be the first case of FTC with metastases to the pituitary causing hypopituitarism. It seems likely that management of such cases could be limited to biopsy to confirm thyroid carcinoma, rather than more extensive surgery, and that this could be followed by multiple treatments with rhTSH followed by (131)I.
