Gel filtration of human serum extracts on Bio-Gel P-30 columns produced two peaks of material reactive with insulin antisera. The earlier eluting fraction appeared at the elution position of proinsulin (serum proinsulin-like component, PLC) while the second fraction corresponded in elution volume to insulin. In assays using porcine insulin-(131)I and an antiserum against porcine insulin, human pancreatic proinsulin was less reactive than human insulin. Serial dilutions of the serum PLC in the immunoassay showed immunological identity with the human proinsulin standard. Partial tryptic digestion of the serum PLC yielded products with increased immunological reactivity as estimated with insulin as the standard. With larger amounts of trypsin, all the serum PLC was converted to insulin-like components (desthreonine and desoctapeptide insulin). On the basis of these results we conclude that the earlier eluting fraction of human serum extracts is proinsulin. The fasting values of proinsulin in normal subjects ranged between 0.05 and 0.4 ng/ml, representing from 5 to 48% of the insulin concentration. In one subject the values of proinsulin were higher than those of insulin. After oral administration of 100 g of glucose, the proinsulin levels tended to rise similarly to insulin. Three obese patients with hyperinsulinemia had higher fasting levels of proinsulin and a greater increase after glucose than the normal subjects. As the high levels of proinsulin coexisted with raised insulin concentration in these obese subjects, the relative proportions of the two hormones were in the same range observed in the normal group. Thus hyperinsulinemia in these obese subjects was not accompanied by an increase in the fraction of serum proinsulin. When the values for serum proinsulin were expressed as percentage of the insulin levels, there was a decrease in the per cent proinsulin in the first hour of the glucose tolerance test. After the second hour, the per cent tended to rise towards the fasting levels.
